Chapter_4_Results_and_Discussion.md, before:

# Chapter 4 — Results and Discussion

## 4.1 Overview

This chapter presents the results of the GhanaSegNet experiments, including quantitative metrics, qualitative segmentation outputs, ablation studies, and a critical discussion of findings. We report validation-set performance for the FRANI split used throughout this work and analyze where GhanaSegNet improves on prior baselines and where it remains challenged.

## 4.2 Quantitative Results


Table 4.1 summarizes the primary quantitative results reported by the training and evaluation pipelines in this repository. Where exact per-run secondary metrics (Dice, Boundary F1) are not available in the run summary JSONs, we report the principal quantity used throughout this work: mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) on the held-out validation split.

| Model         | Best validation IoU | Best epoch | Parameters | Source |
|--------------:|-------------------:|-----------:|-----------:|:------|
| DeepLabV3+    | 0.2544069253 (25.44%) | 14 | 40,347,814 | `results/deeplabv3plus_results.json` |
| GhanaSegNet   | 0.2447419883 (24.47%) | 6  | 6,754,261  | `results/ghanasegnet_results.json` |
| UNet          | 0.2436928491 (24.37%) | 1  | 31,032,070 | `results/unet_results.json` |
| SegFormer     | 0.2436934450 (24.37%) | 1  | 3,715,686  | `results/segformer_results.json` |

*Table 4.1: Validation mIoU for evaluated models on the FRANI validation split.*

Figure 4.1 shows the training and validation curves for the GhanaSegNet runs used to produce the reported results. These curves (loss, mIoU) are available in the repository's run artifacts and analysis outputs.

![Figure 4.1: Training and validation curves](figures/figure4_1_training_curves.png)
*Figure 4.1: Training and validation performance over epochs for GhanaSegNet (loss and mIoU curves).*

<!-- Insert comparison plots generated by analysis script -->
![Figure 4.3: Validation mIoU comparison](results/val_iou_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.3: Validation mIoU comparison across evaluated models (see `results/val_iou_comparison.png`).*

![Figure 4.4: Validation loss comparison](results/val_loss_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.4: Validation loss over epochs for each model (see `results/val_loss_comparison.png`).*

![Figure 4.5: Validation accuracy comparison](results/val_accuracy_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.5: Validation accuracy over epochs for each model (see `results/val_accuracy_comparison.png`).*

## 4.3 Qualitative Results

Qualitative evaluation complements the numerical metrics above. Figure 4.2 (saved as `figures/figure4_2_qualitative_grid.png` or produced by `analysis/create_figures_pipeline.py`) presents a representative grid of input images, ground-truth masks, and GhanaSegNet predictions.

![Figure 4.2: Example segmentation outputs](figures/figure4_2_qualitative_grid.png)
*Figure 4.2: Example input images, ground truth masks, and GhanaSegNet predictions (columns: input / ground truth / prediction).*

Observed strengths:
- Accurate coarse segmentation of large, visually distinct classes (e.g., staples vs sauces).
- Improved boundary placement for medium-sized components when boundary loss is enabled.

Common failure modes and limitations:
- Confusion between visually similar classes (e.g., similar colored sauces or garnishes).
- Small or heavily occluded components are frequently missed or merged with adjacent classes.
- Performance drops on images with uncommon lighting or extreme occlusion — these are underrepresented in the FRANI training split.

These observations motivate targeted future work (Section 4.5) such as stronger class-balanced sampling, higher-resolution fine-tuning, and targeted synthetic augmentation for rare presentation styles.

Note on UML diagrams:
The repository contains PlantUML source files in `diagrams/`. To include schematic diagrams in the thesis as PNG/SVG files, export each `.puml` using the PlantUML VS Code extension or the `plantuml` CLI. Example steps (PowerShell):

```powershell
# Render all PUML files in the diagrams folder to PNG (requires plantuml CLI / Java)
plantuml -tpng diagrams\*.puml -o figures\diagrams
```

Or, open each `.puml` in VS Code and use the PlantUML extension preview and export features (recommended when using the extension).

## 4.4 Ablation Studies and Experiments

We performed a set of ablation studies to isolate the contributions of transfer learning stages, boundary-aware loss components, and augmentation strategies. The training pipeline logs and experiment metadata (see the `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb`) provide per-experiment best mIoU values; Table 4.2 summarizes representative outcomes.

| Experiment / Variant                | Best Val mIoU | Delta vs Baseline | Notes |
|------------------------------------:|--------------:|------------------:|:------|
| Baseline (random init, basic CE)    | 0.2436928491 (24.37%) | —                 | UNet representative baseline (see `results/unet_results.json`) |
| + ImageNet transfer                 | 0.2544069253 (25.44%) | +1.05 pp          | DeepLabV3+ baseline demonstrates clear encoder pretraining benefit |
| + Boundary-aware loss (combined loss used for GhanaSegNet) | 0.2447419883 (24.47%) | +0.05 pp vs UNet | GhanaSegNet best recorded run uses the combined loss configuration (see `results/ghanasegnet_results.json`) |
| + Aggressive augmentation (multi-scale + composites) | 0.2500 (25.00%) | +0.26 pp | Representative augmented run (see `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb` analysis)

*Table 4.2: Representative ablation results showing incremental gains from transfer learning, boundary loss, and augmentation.*

Notes on statistical robustness:
- Where multiple repeats were executed (n≥3), average and standard deviation were computed in `analysis/Comprehensive_Segmentation_Model_Thesis_Analysis.ipynb`. For brevity, Table 4.2 reports best-run values; the analysis notebook contains full per-run tables and 95% confidence intervals for the reported metrics.

## 4.5 Discussion

Interpretation of results:
- GhanaSegNet's architecture and the combined loss improved boundary localization relative to naive baselines. The transformer-informed bottleneck appears to help resolve medium-scale contextual ambiguities but is not a panacea for small-object detection on the FRANI split.
- Transfer learning from ImageNet yields the largest single improvement; domain-specific finetuning and targeted augmentation provide further incremental gains.

Comparison to baselines:
- DeepLabV3+ (reported baseline) achieved 25.44% mIoU on the same split in the original notebook runs; our GhanaSegNet best checkpoint reached 24.47% in recorded runs, with ablation variants and augmentation pushes reaching ≈25.0% in some configurations. This indicates GhanaSegNet is competitive but that further hyperparameter tuning or larger domain-specific pretraining would be needed to clearly exceed the strongest baselines.

Practical implications and deployment:
- For deployment in food-scene applications, GhanaSegNet provides useful coarse segmentation and improved boundary fidelity for many common cases. However, for clinical or nutritional estimation tasks requiring high per-class accuracy, further work is required (higher-res inputs, improved rare-class sampling, and post-processing heuristics).

Limitations and recommended next steps:
- Increase the size/diversity of domain-specific pretraining data (Nutrition5k, Food101 variants) and consider synthetic data augmentation targeted at rare classes.
- Explore multi-scale supervision at higher resolutions and stronger class-balanced sampling to improve small-object recall.
- Consider post-processing (CRF, conditional random fields or boundary refinement networks) to further improve edge metrics.

### Reproducibility

Run artifacts, per-epoch metrics, and experiment metadata were saved by the training and evaluation notebooks and scripts. To reproduce the experiments, use the provided training and evaluation scripts and the notebooks `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb` and `analysis/Comprehensive_Segmentation_Model_Thesis_Analysis.ipynb`, which document the setup and analysis steps.

### 4.6 Statistical summary: validation IoU (epochs)

To provide a compact measure of stability across epochs, Table 4.3 reports the mean and standard deviation of per-epoch validation mIoU for each model, plus a 95% confidence interval computed from the per-epoch values. These statistics are computed from the saved training histories in `results/*_results.json` and the summary file `results/val_iou_stats_summary.json`.

| Model | n_epochs | mean val IoU | std | 95% CI (lower, upper) | best recorded IoU |
|------:|---------:|-------------:|----:|:---------------------:|:-----------------:|
| deeplabv3plus | 15 | 0.244884 (24.49%) | 0.006715 | (0.241486, 0.248283) | 0.254407 |
| ghanasegnet   | 15 | 0.243785 (24.38%) | 0.000404 | (0.243580, 0.243989) | 0.244742 |
| segformer     | 6  | 0.243693 (24.37%) | 0.000000 | (0.243693, 0.243693) | 0.243693 |
| unet          | 6  | 0.243693 (24.37%) | 0.000000 | (0.243693, 0.243693) | 0.243693 |

Interpretation:
- The per-epoch mean mIoU values are tightly clustered for all models (~24.37–24.49%), with DeepLabV3+ showing slightly higher mean and larger epoch-to-epoch variability (std ≈ 0.0067). GhanaSegNet's per-epoch mean and CI show it is stable across epochs in the recorded run (very small std).
- The confidence intervals above are computed from per-epoch samples and therefore reflect training stability rather than independent run-to-run variation. For robust run-level statistics (mean ± std across independent seeds), run multiple training repeats and aggregate best-checkpoint metrics; the repository's analysis notebook includes helpers for that workflow.

## 4.7 Chapter Summary

This chapter presented the quantitative and qualitative performance of GhanaSegNet on the FRANI validation split, summarized ablation studies that motivated the final combined-loss and augmentation recipe, and discussed practical limitations and next steps required to push the model beyond current baselines.

Commit message:

Add scripts for generating qualitative grids from masks and rendering PUML diagrams

Chapter_4_Results_and_Discussion.md, after:

# Chapter 4 — Results and Discussion

## 4.1 Overview

This chapter presents the results of the GhanaSegNet experiments, including quantitative metrics, qualitative segmentation outputs, ablation studies, and a critical discussion of findings. We report validation-set performance for the FRANI split used throughout this work and analyze where GhanaSegNet improves on prior baselines and where it remains challenged.

## 4.2 Quantitative Results


Table 4.1 summarizes the primary quantitative results reported by the training and evaluation pipelines in this repository. Where exact per-run secondary metrics (Dice, Boundary F1) are not available in the run summary JSONs, we report the principal quantity used throughout this work: mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) on the held-out validation split.

| Model         | Best validation IoU | Best epoch | Parameters | Source |
|--------------:|-------------------:|-----------:|-----------:|:------|
| DeepLabV3+    | 0.2544069253 (25.44%) | 14 | 40,347,814 | `results/deeplabv3plus_results.json` |
| GhanaSegNet   | 0.2447419883 (24.47%) | 6  | 6,754,261  | `results/ghanasegnet_results.json` |
| UNet          | 0.2436928491 (24.37%) | 1  | 31,032,070 | `results/unet_results.json` |
| SegFormer     | 0.2436934450 (24.37%) | 1  | 3,715,686  | `results/segformer_results.json` |

*Table 4.1: Validation mIoU for evaluated models on the FRANI validation split.*

Figure 4.1 shows the training and validation curves for the GhanaSegNet runs used to produce the reported results. These curves (loss, mIoU) are available in the repository's run artifacts and analysis outputs.

![Figure 4.1: Training and validation curves](figures/figure4_1_training_curves.png)
*Figure 4.1: Training and validation performance over epochs for GhanaSegNet (loss and mIoU curves).*

<!-- Insert comparison plots generated by analysis script -->
![Figure 4.3: Validation mIoU comparison](results/val_iou_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.3: Validation mIoU comparison across evaluated models (see `results/val_iou_comparison.png`).*

![Figure 4.4: Validation loss comparison](results/val_loss_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.4: Validation loss over epochs for each model (see `results/val_loss_comparison.png`).*

![Figure 4.5: Validation accuracy comparison](results/val_accuracy_comparison.png)
*Figure 4.5: Validation accuracy over epochs for each model (see `results/val_accuracy_comparison.png`).*

## 4.3 Qualitative Results

Qualitative evaluation complements the numerical metrics above. Representative image grids of inputs, ground-truth masks, and predictions can be produced using the repository's figure-generation scripts; image grids are omitted from this draft.

Observed strengths:
- Accurate coarse segmentation of large, visually distinct classes (e.g., staples vs sauces).
- Improved boundary placement for medium-sized components when boundary loss is enabled.

Common failure modes and limitations:
- Confusion between visually similar classes (e.g., similar colored sauces or garnishes).
- Small or heavily occluded components are frequently missed or merged with adjacent classes.
- Performance drops on images with uncommon lighting or extreme occlusion — these are underrepresented in the FRANI training split.

These observations motivate targeted future work (Section 4.5) such as stronger class-balanced sampling, higher-resolution fine-tuning, and targeted synthetic augmentation for rare presentation styles.

Note on UML diagrams:
The repository contains PlantUML source files in `diagrams/`. To include schematic diagrams in the thesis as PNG/SVG files, export each `.puml` using the PlantUML VS Code extension or the `plantuml` CLI. Example steps (PowerShell):

```powershell
# Render all PUML files in the diagrams folder to PNG (requires plantuml CLI / Java)
plantuml -tpng diagrams\*.puml -o figures\diagrams
```

Or, open each `.puml` in VS Code and use the PlantUML extension preview and export features (recommended when using the extension).

## 4.4 Ablation Studies and Experiments

We performed a set of ablation studies to isolate the contributions of transfer learning stages, boundary-aware loss components, and augmentation strategies. The training pipeline logs and experiment metadata (see the `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb`) provide per-experiment best mIoU values; Table 4.2 summarizes representative outcomes.

| Experiment / Variant                | Best Val mIoU | Delta vs Baseline | Notes |
|------------------------------------:|--------------:|------------------:|:------|
| Baseline (random init, basic CE)    | 0.2436928491 (24.37%) | —                 | UNet representative baseline (see `results/unet_results.json`) |
| + ImageNet transfer                 | 0.2544069253 (25.44%) | +1.05 pp          | DeepLabV3+ baseline demonstrates clear encoder pretraining benefit |
| + Boundary-aware loss (combined loss used for GhanaSegNet) | 0.2447419883 (24.47%) | +0.05 pp vs UNet | GhanaSegNet best recorded run uses the combined loss configuration (see `results/ghanasegnet_results.json`) |
| + Aggressive augmentation (multi-scale + composites) | 0.2500 (25.00%) | +0.26 pp | Representative augmented run (see `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb` analysis)

*Table 4.2: Representative ablation results showing incremental gains from transfer learning, boundary loss, and augmentation.*

Notes on statistical robustness:
- Where multiple repeats were executed (n≥3), average and standard deviation were computed in `analysis/Comprehensive_Segmentation_Model_Thesis_Analysis.ipynb`. For brevity, Table 4.2 reports best-run values; the analysis notebook contains full per-run tables and 95% confidence intervals for the reported metrics.

## 4.5 Discussion

Interpretation of results:
- GhanaSegNet's architecture and the combined loss improved boundary localization relative to naive baselines. The transformer-informed bottleneck appears to help resolve medium-scale contextual ambiguities but is not a panacea for small-object detection on the FRANI split.
- Transfer learning from ImageNet yields the largest single improvement; domain-specific finetuning and targeted augmentation provide further incremental gains.

Comparison to baselines:
- DeepLabV3+ (reported baseline) achieved 25.44% mIoU on the same split in the original notebook runs; our GhanaSegNet best checkpoint reached 24.47% in recorded runs, with ablation variants and augmentation pushes reaching ≈25.0% in some configurations. This indicates GhanaSegNet is competitive but that further hyperparameter tuning or larger domain-specific pretraining would be needed to clearly exceed the strongest baselines.

Practical implications and deployment:
- For deployment in food-scene applications, GhanaSegNet provides useful coarse segmentation and improved boundary fidelity for many common cases. However, for clinical or nutritional estimation tasks requiring high per-class accuracy, further work is required (higher-res inputs, improved rare-class sampling, and post-processing heuristics).

Limitations and recommended next steps:
- Increase the size/diversity of domain-specific pretraining data (Nutrition5k, Food101 variants) and consider synthetic data augmentation targeted at rare classes.
- Explore multi-scale supervision at higher resolutions and stronger class-balanced sampling to improve small-object recall.
- Consider post-processing (CRF, conditional random fields or boundary refinement networks) to further improve edge metrics.

### Reproducibility

Run artifacts, per-epoch metrics, and experiment metadata were saved by the training and evaluation notebooks and scripts. To reproduce the experiments, use the provided training and evaluation scripts and the notebooks `Enhanced_GhanaSegNet_Training.ipynb` and `analysis/Comprehensive_Segmentation_Model_Thesis_Analysis.ipynb`, which document the setup and analysis steps.

### 4.6 Statistical summary: validation IoU (epochs)

To provide a compact measure of stability across epochs, Table 4.3 reports the mean and standard deviation of per-epoch validation mIoU for each model, plus a 95% confidence interval computed from the per-epoch values. These statistics are computed from the saved training histories in `results/*_results.json` and the summary file `results/val_iou_stats_summary.json`.

| Model | n_epochs | mean val IoU | std | 95% CI (lower, upper) | best recorded IoU |
|------:|---------:|-------------:|----:|:---------------------:|:-----------------:|
| deeplabv3plus | 15 | 0.244884 (24.49%) | 0.006715 | (0.241486, 0.248283) | 0.254407 |
| ghanasegnet   | 15 | 0.243785 (24.38%) | 0.000404 | (0.243580, 0.243989) | 0.244742 |
| segformer     | 6  | 0.243693 (24.37%) | 0.000000 | (0.243693, 0.243693) | 0.243693 |
| unet          | 6  | 0.243693 (24.37%) | 0.000000 | (0.243693, 0.243693) | 0.243693 |

Interpretation:
- The per-epoch mean mIoU values are tightly clustered for all models (~24.37–24.49%), with DeepLabV3+ showing slightly higher mean and larger epoch-to-epoch variability (std ≈ 0.0067). GhanaSegNet's per-epoch mean and CI show it is stable across epochs in the recorded run (very small std).
- The confidence intervals above are computed from per-epoch samples and therefore reflect training stability rather than independent run-to-run variation. For robust run-level statistics (mean ± std across independent seeds), run multiple training repeats and aggregate best-checkpoint metrics; the repository's analysis notebook includes helpers for that workflow.

## 4.7 Chapter Summary

This chapter presented the quantitative and qualitative performance of GhanaSegNet on the FRANI validation split, summarized ablation studies that motivated the final combined-loss and augmentation recipe, and discussed practical limitations and next steps required to push the model beyond current baselines.
