README.md, before:

# GhanaSegNet: Advanced Deep Learning for Ghanaian Food Segmentation

[![Python 3.8+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![PyTorch](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-2.0+-red.svg)](https://pytorch.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet/blob/main/GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb)

**GhanaSegNet** is a comprehensive research project introducing novel deep learning architectures for semantic segmentation of traditional Ghanaian foods. This project provides two innovative models (GhanaSegNet V1 & V2) with academic-grade benchmarking against state-of-the-art baselines.

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Google Colab (Recommended)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet/blob/main/GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb)

Open our Colab notebook for immediate training with GPU acceleration - no setup required!

### Local Training
```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet.git
cd GhanaSegNet

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run comprehensive benchmarking (all 5 models)
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model all --epochs 15 --benchmark-mode

# Or use our automated benchmarking script
python run_clean_benchmarking.py
```

## 🏆 Novel Contributions

### **GhanaSegNet V1: CNN-Transformer Hybrid**
- **Architecture**: EfficientNet-B2 encoder + Transformer bottleneck + U-Net decoder
- **Innovation**: Food-aware attention mechanisms for African cuisine
- **Performance**: ~67% mIoU with 11.8M parameters

### **GhanaSegNet V2: Cultural Intelligence Enhanced**
- **Architecture**: Advanced multi-scale feature fusion + Cultural context attention
- **Innovation**: Transformer blocks with cultural pattern recognition
- **Performance**: ~68% mIoU with 12.7M parameters

### **Research Methodology**
- **Academic Reproducibility**: Deterministic training with model-specific seeds
- **Fair Benchmarking**: Consistent evaluation against UNet, DeepLabV3+, SegFormer
- **Professional Pipeline**: Early stopping, automated results analysis, publication-ready outputs

## 🔬 Model Comparison

| Model | Parameters | mIoU (%) | Architecture | Key Features |
|-------|-----------|----------|--------------|--------------|
| **GhanaSegNet V2** | 12.7M | **68.45** | CNN-Transformer | Cultural attention, Multi-scale fusion |
| **GhanaSegNet V1** | 11.8M | **67.23** | CNN-Transformer | Food-aware loss, Efficient backbone |
| SegFormer-B0 | 3.7M | 65.12 | Pure Transformer | Lightweight, Fast inference |
| DeepLabV3+ | 39.6M | 64.89 | CNN + ASPP | Atrous convolutions, ResNet-50 |
| U-Net | 31.2M | 63.45 | CNN | Skip connections, Classic architecture |

## 📁 Project Structure

```
GhanaSegNet/
├── models/                          # Model implementations
│   ├── ghanasegnet.py              # GhanaSegNet V1 
│   ├── ghanasegnet.py              # GhanaSegNet (Enhanced Architecture)
│   ├── unet.py                     # U-Net baseline
│   ├── deeplabv3plus.py            # DeepLabV3+ baseline  
│   └── segformer.py                # SegFormer baseline
├── scripts/                         # Training & evaluation
│   ├── train_baselines.py          # Enhanced multi-model training
│   ├── evaluate.py                 # Model evaluation
│   └── test.py                     # Single image inference
├── utils/                          # Utilities
│   ├── losses.py                   # Combined loss functions
│   └── metrics.py                  # Evaluation metrics
├── notebooks/                      # Analysis notebooks
│   ├── baseline_segmentation.ipynb # Model comparison
│   └── results_visualization.ipynb # Results analysis
├── GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb        # Main Colab training notebook
├── run_clean_benchmarking.py      # Automated benchmarking script
└── requirements.txt                # Dependencies
```

## 🔧 Installation & Requirements

### Dependencies
```bash
# Core ML libraries
torch>=2.0.0
torchvision>=0.15.0
efficientnet-pytorch>=0.7.1

# Computer vision
opencv-python>=4.7.0
Pillow>=9.0.0

# Scientific computing  
numpy>=1.21.0
matplotlib>=3.5.0
seaborn>=0.11.0
tqdm>=4.64.0

# Install all at once
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 📦 Dataset Setup

```
data/
├── train/
│   ├── images/          # Training images (.jpg, .png)
│   └── masks/           # Training masks (.png) 
├── val/
│   ├── images/          # Validation images
│   └── masks/           # Validation masks
└── test/ (optional)
    ├── images/          # Test images  
    └── masks/           # Test masks
```

**Dataset Requirements:**
- **Images**: RGB format (256x256 or higher resolution)
- **Masks**: Grayscale with class IDs as pixel values (0-5 for 6 classes)
- **File naming**: Corresponding images and masks must have matching filenames
- **Classes**: Background, Rice, Stew, Plantain, Proteins, Vegetables

## 🚀 Training Models

### Option 1: Train All Models (Recommended)
```bash
# Comprehensive benchmarking with academic reproducibility
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model all --epochs 15 --benchmark-mode

# Or use our automated script with user-friendly interface
python run_clean_benchmarking.py
```

### Option 2: Train Individual Models
```bash
# Train GhanaSegNet V2 (best performance)  
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model ghanasegnet --epochs 15

# Train GhanaSegNet V1
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model ghanasegnet --epochs 15

# Train baseline models
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model unet --epochs 15
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model deeplabv3plus --epochs 15
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model segformer --epochs 15
```

### Training Features
- **Academic Reproducibility**: `--benchmark-mode` ensures deterministic results
- **Model-Specific Seeds**: Each model uses different random seeds for fair comparison
- **Early Stopping**: Automatic stopping when validation performance plateaus
- **Optimal Configuration**: batch_size=8, optimized for GPU memory efficiency
- **Professional Logging**: Comprehensive training metrics and progress tracking

## 📊 Evaluation & Analysis

### Automated Results Analysis
Training automatically generates:
- **Performance metrics**: mIoU, pixel accuracy, per-class F1 scores
- **Training curves**: Loss and IoU progression over epochs  
- **Model comparison**: Side-by-side performance analysis
- **Efficiency analysis**: Parameters vs performance trade-offs

### Manual Evaluation
```bash
# Evaluate specific model on test set
python scripts/evaluate.py --model ghanasegnet --checkpoint checkpoints/ghanasegnet/best_model.pth

# Generate visual predictions
python scripts/test.py --model ghanasegnet --image path/to/test/image.jpg
```

## 🔬 Research Features

### Academic Standards
- **Reproducible Results**: Fixed random seeds with deterministic operations
- **Fair Benchmarking**: Identical training conditions across all models
- **Statistical Validity**: Multiple runs with confidence intervals
- **Publication Ready**: Professional visualizations and result summaries

### Advanced Training Pipeline  
- **Combined Loss Functions**: Dice + Cross-entropy for optimal segmentation
- **Data Augmentation**: Rotation, scaling, color jittering for robustness
- **Learning Rate Scheduling**: Adaptive reduction on plateau
- **Gradient Clipping**: Numerical stability for complex architectures

### Model Architecture Innovations
- **Cultural Attention Mechanisms**: Learn Ghanaian food-specific patterns
- **Multi-Scale Feature Fusion**: Handle diverse food textures and sizes
- **Efficient Transformers**: Balance performance with computational efficiency
- **Skip Connection Optimization**: Enhanced information flow in decoder

## 🎯 Key Results

### Performance Achievements
- **State-of-the-art**: GhanaSegNet V2 achieves 68.45% mIoU
- **Efficiency**: Comparable performance with fewer parameters than baselines
- **Robustness**: Consistent performance across different food types
- **Generalization**: Strong validation performance with early stopping

### Research Impact
- **Novel Architecture**: First CNN-Transformer hybrid for African food segmentation  
- **Cultural Intelligence**: Architecture incorporates domain-specific knowledge
- **Comprehensive Benchmarking**: Fair comparison against established methods
- **Open Source**: Full implementation available for research community

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions to improve GhanaSegNet:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`
3. **Commit changes**: `git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`
4. **Push to branch**: `git push origin feature/amazing-feature`
5. **Open Pull Request**

## 📚 Citation

If you use GhanaSegNet in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{baidoo2025ghanasegnet,
  title={GhanaSegNet: Advanced Deep Learning for Ghanaian Food Segmentation},
  author={Baidoo, Eric},
  year={2025},
  publisher={GitHub},
  url={https://github.com/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet}
}
```

## 🙌 Acknowledgements

- **FRANI Dataset Team**: For providing annotated Ghanaian food images
- **PyTorch Community**: For the excellent deep learning framework  
- **Research Community**: Authors of UNet, DeepLabV3+, SegFormer, and EfficientNet
- **Academic Mentors**: For guidance in developing robust research methodology

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

**Made with dedication for advancing computer vision research in African food recognition** 🇬🇭

Commit message:

Docs: add Chapters section linking Methodology/Implementation/Results

README.md, after:

# GhanaSegNet: Advanced Deep Learning for Ghanaian Food Segmentation

[![Python 3.8+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![PyTorch](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-2.0+-red.svg)](https://pytorch.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet/blob/main/GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb)

**GhanaSegNet** is a comprehensive research project introducing novel deep learning architectures for semantic segmentation of traditional Ghanaian foods. This project provides two innovative models (GhanaSegNet V1 & V2) with academic-grade benchmarking against state-of-the-art baselines.

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Google Colab (Recommended)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet/blob/main/GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb)

Open our Colab notebook for immediate training with GPU acceleration - no setup required!

### Local Training
```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet.git
cd GhanaSegNet

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run comprehensive benchmarking (all 5 models)
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model all --epochs 15 --benchmark-mode

# Or use our automated benchmarking script
python run_clean_benchmarking.py
```

## 🏆 Novel Contributions

### **GhanaSegNet V1: CNN-Transformer Hybrid**
- **Architecture**: EfficientNet-B2 encoder + Transformer bottleneck + U-Net decoder
- **Innovation**: Food-aware attention mechanisms for African cuisine
- **Performance**: ~67% mIoU with 11.8M parameters

### **GhanaSegNet V2: Cultural Intelligence Enhanced**
- **Architecture**: Advanced multi-scale feature fusion + Cultural context attention
- **Innovation**: Transformer blocks with cultural pattern recognition
- **Performance**: ~68% mIoU with 12.7M parameters

### **Research Methodology**
- **Academic Reproducibility**: Deterministic training with model-specific seeds
- **Fair Benchmarking**: Consistent evaluation against UNet, DeepLabV3+, SegFormer
- **Professional Pipeline**: Early stopping, automated results analysis, publication-ready outputs

## 🔬 Model Comparison

| Model | Parameters | mIoU (%) | Architecture | Key Features |
|-------|-----------|----------|--------------|--------------|
| **GhanaSegNet V2** | 12.7M | **68.45** | CNN-Transformer | Cultural attention, Multi-scale fusion |
| **GhanaSegNet V1** | 11.8M | **67.23** | CNN-Transformer | Food-aware loss, Efficient backbone |
| SegFormer-B0 | 3.7M | 65.12 | Pure Transformer | Lightweight, Fast inference |
| DeepLabV3+ | 39.6M | 64.89 | CNN + ASPP | Atrous convolutions, ResNet-50 |
| U-Net | 31.2M | 63.45 | CNN | Skip connections, Classic architecture |

## 📁 Project Structure

```
GhanaSegNet/
├── models/                          # Model implementations
│   ├── ghanasegnet.py              # GhanaSegNet V1 
│   ├── ghanasegnet.py              # GhanaSegNet (Enhanced Architecture)
│   ├── unet.py                     # U-Net baseline
│   ├── deeplabv3plus.py            # DeepLabV3+ baseline  
│   └── segformer.py                # SegFormer baseline
├── scripts/                         # Training & evaluation
│   ├── train_baselines.py          # Enhanced multi-model training
│   ├── evaluate.py                 # Model evaluation
│   └── test.py                     # Single image inference
├── utils/                          # Utilities
│   ├── losses.py                   # Combined loss functions
│   └── metrics.py                  # Evaluation metrics
├── notebooks/                      # Analysis notebooks
│   ├── baseline_segmentation.ipynb # Model comparison
│   └── results_visualization.ipynb # Results analysis
├── GhanaSegNet_Colab.ipynb        # Main Colab training notebook
├── run_clean_benchmarking.py      # Automated benchmarking script
└── requirements.txt                # Dependencies
```

## � Chapters

This repository includes the written report chapters used in the project. See the files below for methodology, implementation details, and experimental results:

- [Chapter 3 — Methodology](Chapter_3_Methodology.md)
- [Chapter 4 — Implementation](Chapter_4_Implementation.md)
- [Chapter 5 — Results & Discussion](Chapter_5_Results.md)

For reproducible experiments and run logs, check the `checkpoints/ghanasegnet/` directory.

## �🔧 Installation & Requirements

### Dependencies
```bash
# Core ML libraries
torch>=2.0.0
torchvision>=0.15.0
efficientnet-pytorch>=0.7.1

# Computer vision
opencv-python>=4.7.0
Pillow>=9.0.0

# Scientific computing  
numpy>=1.21.0
matplotlib>=3.5.0
seaborn>=0.11.0
tqdm>=4.64.0

# Install all at once
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 📦 Dataset Setup

```
data/
├── train/
│   ├── images/          # Training images (.jpg, .png)
│   └── masks/           # Training masks (.png) 
├── val/
│   ├── images/          # Validation images
│   └── masks/           # Validation masks
└── test/ (optional)
    ├── images/          # Test images  
    └── masks/           # Test masks
```

**Dataset Requirements:**
- **Images**: RGB format (256x256 or higher resolution)
- **Masks**: Grayscale with class IDs as pixel values (0-5 for 6 classes)
- **File naming**: Corresponding images and masks must have matching filenames
- **Classes**: Background, Rice, Stew, Plantain, Proteins, Vegetables

## 🚀 Training Models

### Option 1: Train All Models (Recommended)
```bash
# Comprehensive benchmarking with academic reproducibility
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model all --epochs 15 --benchmark-mode

# Or use our automated script with user-friendly interface
python run_clean_benchmarking.py
```

### Option 2: Train Individual Models
```bash
# Train GhanaSegNet V2 (best performance)  
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model ghanasegnet --epochs 15

# Train GhanaSegNet V1
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model ghanasegnet --epochs 15

# Train baseline models
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model unet --epochs 15
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model deeplabv3plus --epochs 15
python scripts/train_baselines.py --model segformer --epochs 15
```

### Training Features
- **Academic Reproducibility**: `--benchmark-mode` ensures deterministic results
- **Model-Specific Seeds**: Each model uses different random seeds for fair comparison
- **Early Stopping**: Automatic stopping when validation performance plateaus
- **Optimal Configuration**: batch_size=8, optimized for GPU memory efficiency
- **Professional Logging**: Comprehensive training metrics and progress tracking

## 📊 Evaluation & Analysis

### Automated Results Analysis
Training automatically generates:
- **Performance metrics**: mIoU, pixel accuracy, per-class F1 scores
- **Training curves**: Loss and IoU progression over epochs  
- **Model comparison**: Side-by-side performance analysis
- **Efficiency analysis**: Parameters vs performance trade-offs

### Manual Evaluation
```bash
# Evaluate specific model on test set
python scripts/evaluate.py --model ghanasegnet --checkpoint checkpoints/ghanasegnet/best_model.pth

# Generate visual predictions
python scripts/test.py --model ghanasegnet --image path/to/test/image.jpg
```

## 🔬 Research Features

### Academic Standards
- **Reproducible Results**: Fixed random seeds with deterministic operations
- **Fair Benchmarking**: Identical training conditions across all models
- **Statistical Validity**: Multiple runs with confidence intervals
- **Publication Ready**: Professional visualizations and result summaries

### Advanced Training Pipeline  
- **Combined Loss Functions**: Dice + Cross-entropy for optimal segmentation
- **Data Augmentation**: Rotation, scaling, color jittering for robustness
- **Learning Rate Scheduling**: Adaptive reduction on plateau
- **Gradient Clipping**: Numerical stability for complex architectures

### Model Architecture Innovations
- **Cultural Attention Mechanisms**: Learn Ghanaian food-specific patterns
- **Multi-Scale Feature Fusion**: Handle diverse food textures and sizes
- **Efficient Transformers**: Balance performance with computational efficiency
- **Skip Connection Optimization**: Enhanced information flow in decoder

## 🎯 Key Results

### Performance Achievements
- **State-of-the-art**: GhanaSegNet V2 achieves 68.45% mIoU
- **Efficiency**: Comparable performance with fewer parameters than baselines
- **Robustness**: Consistent performance across different food types
- **Generalization**: Strong validation performance with early stopping

### Research Impact
- **Novel Architecture**: First CNN-Transformer hybrid for African food segmentation  
- **Cultural Intelligence**: Architecture incorporates domain-specific knowledge
- **Comprehensive Benchmarking**: Fair comparison against established methods
- **Open Source**: Full implementation available for research community

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions to improve GhanaSegNet:

1. **Fork the repository**
2. **Create feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`
3. **Commit changes**: `git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`
4. **Push to branch**: `git push origin feature/amazing-feature`
5. **Open Pull Request**

## 📚 Citation

If you use GhanaSegNet in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{baidoo2025ghanasegnet,
  title={GhanaSegNet: Advanced Deep Learning for Ghanaian Food Segmentation},
  author={Baidoo, Eric},
  year={2025},
  publisher={GitHub},
  url={https://github.com/EricBaidoo/GhanaSegNet}
}
```

## 🙌 Acknowledgements

- **FRANI Dataset Team**: For providing annotated Ghanaian food images
- **PyTorch Community**: For the excellent deep learning framework  
- **Research Community**: Authors of UNet, DeepLabV3+, SegFormer, and EfficientNet
- **Academic Mentors**: For guidance in developing robust research methodology

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

**Made with dedication for advancing computer vision research in African food recognition** 🇬🇭
